RMF security section (#48)
osrf/ros2multirobotbook: src/security.md

# Security

This chapter describes how to use DDS Security tools to provide authentication,
encryption, and access control to a RoMi-H system. 

The security of the RoMi-H system can be divided into two main parts: 
its ROS 2 elements and the dashboard. The security of the ROS 2 
elements is provided by the DDS security tools which help ensure authentication, 
encryption and access control. The dashboard provides the user with an 
instruments panel while ensuring encryption, integrity and authentication of 

> the server side through TLS. The user authentication and access control 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the connection to the server through TLS. User authentication and access control 
```

is made by user/password checking against a database and then 

> providing that user with an access level to the secured ROS 2 network that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 providing that user with access to the secured ROS 2 network at a level that
```

corresponds to the role of that user.
 
![Security System Infrastructure](images/security/system_infrastructure.png)

> As a guidance, the [RMF demos][rmf_demos] repository contains an example of a 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [RMF demos][rmf_demos] repository contains an example of a 
```

> full RMF run of the office demo using secured ROS 2 communications along with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
full RMF application using secured ROS 2 communications along with
```

step by step explanations. 

## ROS 2 Security

ROS 2 contains tools that help create and load the needed security artifacts 
to enable DDS-security. RoMi-H makes uses of these tools in order to enable 
security on its ROS 2 elements. A brief introduction to these tools and its 

> usage is provided here, however, for a deeper understanding of the whole system, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
usage is provided here. For a deeper understanding of the whole system, 
```

> please refer to the documenation of the [ROS 2 DDS-Security integration][SROS].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
please refer to the [ROS 2 DDS-Security integration][SROS] documentation.
```

  list_keys           List keys

  Call \`ros2 security <command> -h\` for more detailed usage.
```

#### SROS 2 environment variables

There are a few environment variables you should be aware of when using SROS 2: 

- **ROS_SECURITY_ENABLE** is the SROS 2 enabler variable, it takes a boolean value 
(true or false) and indicates if the security is enabled or not. 
- **ROS_SECURITY_STRATEGY** can be set to `Enforce` or `Permissive`, with the first one it 
will fail to run a participant if the security files are not found, whereas with the second one will 
just run the participant in non secure mode if those files are not found. 
- **ROS_SECURITY_KEYSTORE** should point to the root of the keystore directory tree. This will help `RCL`
find the location of the security artifacts to initialize the ROS 2 security environment.

#### SROS 2 security keystore

The keystore is the root directory where the DDS security artifacts are stored. `RCL` will use the 
contents of this directory to provide the DDS security to the ROS 2 network. The 
`ROS_SECURITY_KEYSTORE` environment variable should by convention point to this directory. In order 

> to initalize and populate a `keystore_storage` directory files the following command can be used:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to initalize and populate `keystore_storage` directory files the following command can be used:
```

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
$ ros2 security create_keystore keystore_storage
creating keystore: keystore_test
creating new CA key/cert pair
creating governance file: keystore_test/enclaves/governance.xml
creating signed governance file: keystore_test/enclaves/governance.p7s
```

After creating the keystore, its initial structure would look like this:

    keystore_storage
    ├── enclaves
    |   ├── governance.p7s
    |   └── governance.xml
    ├── private
    |   ├── ca.key.pem
    |   ├── identity_ca.key.pem
    |   └── permissions_ca.key.pem
    └── public
        ├── ca.key.pem
        ├── identity_ca.key.pem
        └── permissions_ca.key.pem

The `public` directory contains anything permissible as public, such as public certificates for 
the identity or permissions Certificate Authorities (CA). As such, this can be given read access to all 

> executables. Note that in the default case, both the `identity_ca` and `permissions_ca` points to the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
executables. Note that in the default case, both `identity_ca` and `permissions_ca` point to the 
```

same CA certificate.

The `private` directory contains anything permissible as private, such as private key material for 

> aforementioned certificate authorities. This directory should be redacted before deploying the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
aforementioned certificate authorities. This directory should be removed before deploying the 
```

keystore onto the target device/robot.

> The `enclaves` directory contains the security artifacts associated with individual enclaves. 
> This is a concept that was introduced with the `ROS 2 Foxy Fitzroy` release, as domain participants 
> are no longer mapped directly to ROS nodes. `Foxy` introduces the concept of a security “enclave”, 
> where an “enclave” is a process or group of processes that will share the same identity and access 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `enclaves` directory contains the security artifacts associated with individual security enclaves. 
SROS 2 introduces the concept of a security “enclave”, 
where an “enclave” is a process or group of processes that will share the same identity and access 
```

> control rules. The enclaves folder may still recursively nest sub-paths for organizing separate enclaves. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
control rules. The enclaves folder may recursively nest sub-paths for organizing separate enclaves. 
```

#### SROS 2 enclave keys

> Once the `keystore` has been initialized you might wanna create the security keys for your 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the `keystore` has been initialized you may wish to create the security keys for your 
```

command that you can use to generate all of them at once:

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
$ ros2 security generate_artifacts -k keystore_storage -p policy.xml
keystore_storage is not a valid keystore, creating new keystore
creating keystore: keystore_storage
creating new CA key/cert pair
creating governance file: keystore_storage/enclaves/governance.xml
creating signed governance file: keystore_storage/enclaves/governance.p7s
all done! enjoy your keystore in keystore_storage
cheers!
creating key for identity: '/hosptial/rviz'
creating cert and key
creating permission
creating permission file for identity: '/hosptical/rviz'
creating permission
...
```

Finally SROS 2 also provides a way to easily list the keys of a certain keystorage:

``` {.sourceCode .bash}
$ ros2 security list_keys keystore_storage
/hospital/building_map_server
/hopsital/building_systems_visualizer
/hospital/door_supervisor
/hospital/fleet_state_visualizer
/hosptial/loop_request_publisher
/hosptial/rviz2
...
```

## RoMi-H Dashboard Security

The RoMi-H Dashboard is a web application that provides overall visualization and control over the 

> RoMi-H system. It is serverd over TLS to ensure encryption, integrity and authentication of the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RoMi-H system. It is served over TLS to ensure encryption, integrity and authentication of the 
```

communication with the final user. The server uses [openid-connect (OIDC)][openid_connect] for 

> authentication, it is a open standard based on [oauth 2.0][oauth2] and [JOSE][jose]. Currently the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
authentication, an open standard based on [oauth 2.0][oauth2] and [JOSE][jose]. Currently the 
```
